Jeremy we've heard point and
Counterpoint we've heard the the legal
mechanics but big picture what's next
well big picture is that first of all we
haven't heard from the Israelis what
they're going to say I think we can
guess they're not going to be at all
happy with this uh under the terms of uh
the court of which they are a member
they are supposed to follow through and
do all these things they will argue
they're doing a lot of them already uh
Israel this is one of the provisional
measures Israel must take all measures
to prevent any acts that could be
considered genocidal including killing
members of a group causing bodily harm
inflicting conditions asde to bring
about the destruction of a group
preventing birth so it's not saying
you've got to stop your War it's saying
You' got to fight it in a very different
way and Israel has been saying
throughout it is fighting it within the
constraints of international
humanitarian law and this is the
un's most senior Court saying that
they're not doing that and they need to
do it ASAP without
prejudicing the uh consideration the
court will give to South Africa's
petition in over a long period okay
Jeremy very grateful for your analysis
really appreciate you being with us uh
you mentioned the Israeli government
there we will be hearing uh in around an
hour's time from Mark regev who speaks
for the Israeli government if you're
just joining us you're watching BBC News
we've been watching a ruling in the
international court of justice which has
been giving a provisional ruling on a
case brought by South Africa against
Israel a case of genocide one of the
most serious war crimes if not the most
serious War crime that can have action
brought against it the icj rules on
State against State cases both South
Africa and Israel are signatories to the
genocide convention which is why the icj
has been ruling on this case we can go
live now to the ha and our correspondent
Anna hollan who's been watching
proceedings in the court and Anna talk
to us about the reaction when these
preliminary rulings were
given uh well uh we were inside the
courtroom reaction there was very quiet
as all the journalists were trying to
follow exactly what this means what the
judges have ordered is that Israel stick
to its obligations under the genocide
convention something that actually
Israel has maintained it has done
throughout this entire process ever
since it responded to the Hamas attacks
on the 7th of October uh so just to run
through what uh judge Joan e Donahue
said uh she ordered that uh Israel must
take all measures within its powers to
prevent any genocidal acts it must
ensure there are no statements that
could be seen as incitement to genocide
I'm just looking at some of the reaction
coming through already from various uh
human rights groups this is being seen
as a victory for South Africa which
brought this case under the genocide
convention and yet all the judges are
really doing is saying that Israel must
uphold its existing obligation something
it says it's already doing uh to bring
you a reaction quickly from Human Rights
Watch uh they say the world Court's
Landmark decision puts Israel and its
allies on noticed that immediate action
is needed to prevent genocide and
further atrocities against Palestinian
in Gaza to remind you uh genocide is the
intent to destroy in whole in part an
entire ethnic racial religious or
national group that will be dealt with
later on the merits of the case this is
purely about the provisional measures
requested by South Africa designed to
prevent any escalation and any actions
that could constitute genocide under the
genocide convention okay Anna hollan who
is in the ha for us Anna thank you very
much really appreciate it let's go now
to South Africa and speak to Kingsley
maabela former Chief of Staff to uh
South Africa's foreign affairs minister
uh Mr makab thank you very much for
being with us sir what is your immediate
reaction to this ruling by the
icj good afternoon what a pleasure to
talk to you it's um the ruling actually
um Vindicated sou Africa's concern about
the possibility that there's genocide
going on in G
that's one H but the Judgment the
Judgment was quite lengthy in spelling
out what what what they think are Prim
facty evidence that genocide may be
going including statement made by Senor
Israeli officials and so on so the take
from this is is the responsibility of
Israel as occupying power to take
appropriate measures to prevent genocide
I think that's what everyone takes out
of that of course it was not expected
that the court would interfere with the
what is essentially a mandate of the
security Council to order a ceas fire
Sara didn't get that but Sara got at
least the greater part of what it
requested and and actually the majority
of Judges voted in favor of S afa's View
uh you mentioned an important point
there there was no order of a ceasefire
now you say that in many ways South
Africa wouldn't have expected that but
it's certainly something it would have
wanted is there a feeling or will there
be a feeling amongst Mr ramapo's office
that this doesn't go far enough and that
the court could have done
more well in the absence of a a ceire
judgment the responsibility of course is
squarely a place on Israel to take
appropriate measures to prevent genocide
I think that's that's enough on its own
uh you would you would know there been a
cronous debate within the security
Council around the question of ceasefire
of course Israel takes out of this
judgment the fact that it wasn't ordered
to um seize the hostility immediately
but there are certain measures that are
required to be implemented with
immediate effect including preserving EV
evidence there really it has been a very
bad judgment for Israel in my view the
icj Mr Mela does not have enforcement
Powers it can issue this provisional
ruling but it does not have enforcement
powers and in any case Israel has not
only said that it is already doing its
utmost to prevent harm to civilians but
it's also said that it may not adhere to
any icj ruling how will South Africa
react if that comes to pass well well it
would it would be a very big problem in
terms of pivate Regulation perception if
Israel really refuses to implement any
of the measures that the court came up
with I think it will lose out in terms
of the face around the world but U
really um the question of Israel
expecting not to honor this it's
something else of course article 59 of
the of the Court spells out that its
decision is advisory but it's a prudent
advisor it's very wise advis that one
who think Israel would hit the call
would heit this advice
Mr M thank you very much for being with
us